Oral interview with Sandy Livingood, 18 August
1988. Your
first tour in Vietnam was June 1964 to December
1964 and you were a Civil Affairs and
Psychological Warfare Officer with Special
Forces 1st Corps RVN.
In the beginning, what kind of special forces
training did you have before you went? Had you had
any at all? I had not had any special forces
training at all. Transferred from the 173rd
Airborne Brigade on Okinawa to the 1st Special
Forces Group. Without any special forces
training, I'd had, of course, the airborne
training and Where did you train? For the airborne
training in the States? Yes, I went through
airborne school in Georgia in 1965. Had you had any
kind of jungle warfare training? Yes, with the
173rd we'd had jungle training in northern
Oklahoma
and on a local town called Ariel Moody. I'm not sure
exactly where it is. I'm not sure that we ever got to
see a map at that time, and if we did, it's been so
long. As I recall, it wasn't too far from Formosa.
It was one of the, I believe, one of the Ryukyu
groups. I'm not sure. What percentage of that kind
of training do you think was specifically geared
towards Vietnam? Probably none of the training
itself was geared towards Vietnam. It was geared
towards reaction to
a threat within Southeast
Asia, and possibly on the mainland, possibly on
one of the islands. We trained in the 173rd to meet
all the threats that
were thought of. strictly war planning type of
training.
Before you went the first time, did you get any
language training in Vietnamese or French?
Yes. As I recall, I had about three weeks of
training in a branch of the Language School, the
Department of Defense Language School in
Okinawa. It was survival training. It was
language survival. It was the very basics and
enough to give us an idea of how the language was
spoken to develop some accent and to give us the
ability to make ourselves understood to a very
limited extent. So with that limited experience
or language training, what kind of language
problems did you encounter when you got to
Vietnam, or how was the language situation dealt
with when you got there? At the time that I arrived
in 1964, we had a fairly large number of people
there who spoke English to some extent.
Interpreters were made available to us. As a
matter of fact, I had an interpreter clerk in my
section when I arrived. He'd been hired by
previous Civil Affairs Science Officers to work
for them as an interpreter, translator, clerk.
What specifically were your duties as a psyops
officer on civil affairs times civil affairs
officer? That is not easy to explain. I guess I can
best explain it by saying that I was in charge of
supervision, assistance, and planning of the
Civil Affairs, Psychological Warfare
Operations, or the Special Forces in the First
Corps, known as I-Corps, Republic of Vietnam.
I coordinated and assisted the aid teams. Those
were the teams that were out in the provinces
working with the special forces teams, and with
the Civil Irregular Defense Group, they were the
troops being trained by both U.S. special forces
and with the Vietnamese special forces. They were
placed in the villages or around the villages, and
the best I recall about battalion strength and
they established an outpost and patrol from the
outposts in varying areas of operation, areas of
operation varying in size, varying in size. Some
maybe 10 square miles, others up to 50 or 60 square
miles, and most of the camps at that particular
time in June of 1964 were in the populated areas
in the lowland at the base of the mountainous
areas. These were lowland camps, but they were
close to the mountains. with the exception of the
one camp at Ashau. They were, and again the one at
Kashan, they were normally at the very edge of the
fairly densely populated areas.
What kinds of problems did you have training the
RVN?
We were not training ARVN as such. These were
paramilitary type troops that we were looking at,
and I was not directly involved with the training.
My job was directed towards, as we later call it,
winning the hearts and minds of the people. But our
job was to ensure that it was possible that we would
have a fairly close rapport and interface between
the Special Forces and with the local villages so
that we would have some close bond between the two
elements there, the civil government and the
military, as well as the population.
What would you say were the relationships or the
relations between the Vietnamese and the
Americans in 1964?
There was a great deal of trust between the local
special forces teams and the villagers.
And in this way we were trying and we felt that our
job was to further the government of Vietnam image
with the local people. It was not a situation where
the U.S. Special Forces people wanted to
become the father figure for the villagers. And we
always tried to take with us when we were doing
our medical calls and sick calls and so forth, we
wanted to take with us Vietnamese special forces.
And we always had interpreters, of course we had
guards and Vietnamese soldiers, the
paramilitary. with us and we attempted wherever
we could to make it known to them that we were there
under the sponsorship of the government.
What do you think was the relationship with the
South Vietnamese government and the peasants?
Very little. As a matter of fact, this is true
throughout my entire experience in vietnam the
local villagers really did not identify with the
with the government itself they identified with
their local village chief and they knew who he was
but so far as having any identification with the
government in saigon or the government in The
North, they really had none. It was a matter that in
most cases the Vietnamese are Oriental
people. Whether they be Chinese or ethnic
Vietnamese or ethnic Cambodian or ethnic Indian,
they still had the Oriental outlook and their life
was based on the family and the extended family and
their life was based on their religion and on their
day-to-day child that they did not identify even
with even district government province or
national government now the relationship
between the government and the local villagers
was represented by, as I said before, the building
chief. And on occasion they would be visited by
district and province officials. At that time
they were mostly military officials. The
district chief would be maybe an army captain or an
army major, depending on the size of the district.
And the province chief would be either a
lieutenant colonel or a colonel in the Army of the
Republic of Vietnam Army. How was the
relationship between the ARVN and the U.S.
military? During this period of time, I was not
really concerned with the Army of the Republic of
Vietnam, as a matter of fact. At that particular
time, there were only about two Arvin divisions in
the whole of I-Corps. I believe this has been many
years ago, and I'm trying to recall. I believe it
was the 1st and 2nd Divisions. And one of those
divisions was stationed at Way and Point 3. And I do
not recall the location where the 2nd Division was
stationed. But there was no interaction that I
ever observed between the Army of Vietnam and the
local populace. I guess you might say that I was too
far out in the woods and the jungle to really see
them. What kinds of project buildings were you
involved in?
Some of the, I helped to build dispensaries. When I
say I helped, I personally did very little out with
the A-teams. I was primarily a facilitator. In
other words,
I was able to give them blueprints. I was able to
give, and you'll have to realize that a concrete
block or a compressed earth and cement block
building. It doesn't take much blueprints, but I
was able to give them some idea of the number of
bricks that it might take. I was able to get the
cement for them. And just to put it quickly, I I
worked helping them build their own
dispensaries, get them the white paint and so
forth, and to approve the funds that were
necessary for them to buy the materials if the
materials were necessary. Of course, bamboo is
readily available in most areas of Vietnam, and a
lot of their construction was with bamboo, and
even the more permanent buildings, some of them
had bamboo materials in them. but I was able to get
cut timber and lumber for them. Let's see, we had
soil factories, and that is a grandiose term for
maybe building a communal building in one of the
villages and obtaining soil machines and
quality. And these were supposed to be
semi-cottage industry where the local ladies
could begin to sew, for instance, uniforms for the
CIDG. And we furnished initially the, I guess
you'd call it seed money. We furnished the
materials and the sewing machines and so forth.
And they furnished the labor to build the built a
house, and then they sold their product to the
local people and were able to buy more material and
carry on making a little pocket money. And it was
hoped to be the beginning of industry, something
other than strictly rice paddy work. In the area of
the city of Da Nang, which was my personal
responsibility as part of the B team, which had the
first corps at that time. I worked with an
American, actually a Canadian missionary who had
been in Southeast Asia for many, many years. And
I'm saying 30 to 40 years he'd been working in
Indochina. not only in Vietnam, but also in
Cambodia. And he was sponsoring, through his
church, an orphanage, a leprosarium, and a
tubercularium. I think that's the way you
pronounce it, tuberculosis sanitary. And the
leprosarium was just beginning to get off the
ground, and I did a lot of work there. people
working for me that were experts in construction,
engineers. And with the orphanage, the team
itself, the orphanage had already been built. But
we worked in that area considerably, helping them
with additional
things such as a bath house and recreational
construction. and even, as I recall, a small
merry-go-round
for them. What about strategic hamlets? Were you
involved in any of the building and relocating of
the refugees to strategic hamlets?
In 1964, the term was strategic hamlet. I don't
believe it had been invented. Possibly so, but if
it was, it had not reached my area. And these
strategic hamlets, if they were existing, were
existing further back towards the coast. I was not
personally involved with the strategic handlers
there.
Were you aware of infiltration on the
demilitarized zone by the Viet Cong at that time or
vice versa? Were there any special forces groups,
hunter-killer teams going into the DMZ?
Around the DMZ, we were not aware of it. If it was
going on, I believe at that time most of our
activity was coming from the Laotian area.
Primarily the DMZ was
east of the Kashan area and that would probably
have been the area of operations of the 1st
Division.
our team there at cation was patrolling primarily
in the islands around the special forces camp over
to the ocean border and i will just comment that
it's been my recollection and was then that until
July of that year, it was what we call a friendly
war. There wasn't a lot of
contact between the, there wasn't a great deal of
military contact between the BC and the
government forces. The reason I say that is
because the BC efforts were by and large directed
against the civil population. They killed
doctors, they killed village chiefs, they killed
school teachers. It appeared at that time that the
effort was being, in our area, the effort was being
carried out against the educated people. They
were attempting to eliminate education.
In relation to your duties as psyops, officer,
what kind of psyops tactics were y'all using at
that time, if any? Well, we felt that civil affairs
itself, the civic action programs that we were
using were psychological warfare. But in
addition to those, we had available to us
aviation assets to some extent. We had printing
assets available in Saigon. We dropped leaflets.
We dropped
little care packets, we called them, containing
tobacco, cigarettes, chewing gum, and a small
comic book wrapped in a baggie, I guess you'd call
it. We dropped those on the villages along the
border, those that we could find on both sides of
the border, I think. You have to understand that
once you get into the highlands there, that the
border is not marked on the ground as a little black
line. And I'm sure there were occasions that we
found villages on both sides, and possibly we did
drop into Latinas. absolutely that on at least one
occasion that I did drop some of the propaganda
leaflets and care packets into a village on the
west side of the international border. And I was
never sure even then that either government knew
where the border was. We had also loudspeakers,
aviation-mounted loudspeakers that had a
tremendous coverage. They were loud. We played
Vietnamese tapes. Now, I'm sure that in
retrospect that this had nothing to do with the
civil populace, but the only possible use it could
have been would to be maybe discouraging, playing
on the nerves of the Viet Cong who were in there. And
you must remember that the Highlands were not
Vietnamese, that they were Montagnards. And this
was our biggest task because we did not have
Montagnard speakers, Montagnard people.
they had languages that no one had ever
translated.
And each of the Montagnard tribes, their
languages could be as separate as the languages of
the American Indian. And a distance of 15 miles or
less that the language of the tribe would change or
the area would change, were that they were
mutually unintelligible, that people from 15
miles away could not speak to each other and
understand. And I remember also that they were
still in the Stone Age and possibly still are. I
don't know. But with the exception of those who
were around there were very few tribes which had
become even civilized.
The situation was a little bit different. In
I-Corps, the brew at Kashan, I believe that was the
tribe, were reasonably civilized, but they had
just come out of the Stone Age or the Bamboo Age,
which hit them. Do you see a lot of culture clashes?
As far as clashing goes, I can't say that I did. It
was peaceful coexistence with the cultures as far
as I can tell. And primarily the
The one I am most familiar with where I saw the
Montagnards in large numbers was at the village of
Keishon, and they co-existed quite well. They
would hold their, when there was a market day, the
Montagnard and the Vietnamese and the Chinese
were all right at the market, and they bought and
sold to one another. depending upon what they had
to sell and what they wanted to buy.
In the Khe Sanh area, they have been
civilized long enough that many of the modern
yards work with the French plantation owners,
called the plantation owners, and they work with
the Vietnamese in the villages, or in the village
of Khe Sanh. But culture clash, I think they each
maintained their own culture as they saw fit.
There didn't seem to be any real put down of the
Montagnards by the local Vietnamese. As a matter
of fact, many of the
paramilitary CIDG.
In the Khe Sanh area, there were Monitors. They had
been enlisted and trained by the Vietnamese, and
they had their own way, their own their own diet, so
to speak, and they ate what they could get. As a
matter of fact, throughout my experiences in
Vietnam, it appeared to me that both the
Vietnamese Moniards and Laotians and Cambodians
ate what they could get. As far as the religion
goes, of course the Vietnamese were either
Buddhist or Protestant or Catholic Christians,
and the Montagnards were animist. But that did not
seem to be anything unusual, with the exception of
the big cities such as Saigon, and
I guess primarily Saigon as far as I can recall.
There did not seem to be any religious
conflict during, at least that I saw. As you
probably know, history tells us that President
Zim and his brother and sister-in-law were
fanatic Catholic, and they did in fact favor the
Catholics of Vietnam, but as far as being
intolerant of religion, there did not appear to be
any at any place I was in Vietnam. What about the
Americans in Vietnam? Did you yourself
experience culture shock, or how did you react to
the different cultures?
I had no real culture shock. I had been in the Orient
before and I think that I was personally adult
enough to realize that everyone to their own way.
As you know, we've been on Okinawa before I went to
Vietnam. You know that I had been in Korea prior to
going to Vietnam, Japan, and several other
places. So culture shock was not something that
was likely to arise with me. I was one of the oldest
soldiers to go there, and I had learned by this time
to expect the unexpected. And to respect,
hopefully, the culture of other peoples without
being condescending or to look with disfavor upon
it. But were there problems with some of the other
people that weren't so educated? Yes, it was not.
Not especially true within the Special Forces
teams. They did on occasion have some conflict
with the philosophy of warfare within the Special
Forces. The primary conflicts that I saw in the
Serbs was the apparent unwillingness of the
Vietnamese to press forward with an attack or to
pursue
the enemy. This was normal throughout, and there
were exceptions with the Vietnamese.
The philosophy of the American is once you attack,
you attack in strength. You attack with
everything that you can bring to bear upon the
enemy. And once you have started him to retreat,
you pursue with vigor. This was not the overall
philosophy of the Vietnamese.
were, in my estimation, in many cases, timid.
Don't take this to mean that they all were. Some
were absolute tigers and would fight through
everything they had at the enemy and pursue as
a tiger.
Did you think that we could win the war when you left
in 1964 in December?
Yes, I believe that the policies that we were
pursuing at that time were the policies that
would, in fact, win the war. At that particular
time, when I left, there were no American troops as
such. There were no American ground troops on the
ground in Vietnam. Little did we know what was
going to happen. I think that we were succeeding
using the policies that we were pursuing at that
time. Which was to gain the friendship of the
people? Pacification.
Did you know any civilians that first time? Yes, I
did. I knew a few civilians, not a great number. I
had, as a result of my type of work, I had come to know
some peasants. I had come to know some merchants
and the Vietnamese people themselves. I like
them, and I think probably they liked me. On the
other hand, I could be wrong. They could have been
trying to take advantage of that friendship for
whatever reason, but I doubt it.
How was the esprit de corps of the Special Forces
and the Americans that were over there? Very high,
very high.
The Americans in Vietnam at that time knew that we
had a mission, and they believed in their
government. They believed in the methods that we
were using, and I believe for that reason.
As you know, Special Forces is and was all
volunteers. And I believe that you'll find a
higher discreet accord in volunteers. And each of
them had more or less volunteered two or three
times in order to get where they were. And
they were doing quite well. They believed in what
they were doing. When you believe in what you're
doing, you're free to court. It's always normal.
When you left Vietnam, did the US military ever ask
you what would be better ways to train our people
that were going over there?
Did they debrief you? I had a debriefing, but It was
primarily directed towards civil affairs,
psychological warfare, civic action. Did they
ask suggestions of how to get the Vietnamese
people to help the Americans, or to help us? I don't
recall what they ever did.
In the year that you were gone, what did you do, and
did you get any training that was related to
Vietnam?
you're
asking about the period of time between December
of 64 and December
of 64 as I recall I trained with special forces in
Taiwan I trained with special forces in Korea and
Both of those were extended exercises from, I
believe, each one of them was three months or more
in those areas. And we acted in joint exercises in
both places with U.S. Special Forces and Korean
Special Forces and the Republic of China Special
Forces were operating in a similar type scenario.
The environments, of course, were different in
Korea and Taiwan. Taiwan being more jungle-like
and Korea being rather mountainous. As I recall,
the scenario was that he joined U.S. and would
go into an area, recruit and train
guerrillas. And of course, this was carried out
under the auspices of the respective governments
and in cooperation with the U.S. Special Forces.
On the island of Okinawa, we carried out several
small exercises, but I was not directly involved
with those. My primary duties were preparation of
area studies and studying of the various
countries within Southeast Asia. At
approximately the time that I came back, possibly
even before I don't recall the time sequence,
Special Forces Group headquarters was
re-designated Special Action Forces Asia. And
they were given the responsibility, as I recall,
sometime during this time, of reacting with
Special Forces and regular troops
in each country of our area of operations. And this
was from, as I recall, Burma, Laos, Cambodia,
Vietnam, Taiwan, Korea. And I don't believe we had
a Japan team, but I do know that one of our teams did
go to Japan during that time. I did not
Were you able to use your experiences in Vietnam to
facilitate any of that training or to help you?
Certainly, certainly.
But it was somewhat difficult to overlay the
training or the experiences in Vietnam in, for
instance,
Republic of China, Taiwan. since their ideas of
civil affairs did not exactly coincide with ours,
and we were a guest
in that particular country at the time. And while
we could influence our own people, it was
sometimes difficult at the higher headquarters,
and I was in each case at the headquarters, not with
one of the field teams, it was difficult to
influence the high-ranking Chinese or
high-ranking Korean officers towards this area
because they were primarily interested in the
morale and welfare of their own troops and the
guerrillas rather than the –
indigenous or civilian or local populace and
those type of things were primarily I could
influence our own teams and possibly gain a little
headway towards the idea of winning hearts and
minds and influencing the from my area down
through the American team, back across to either
the Chinese or Korean team, back across to the
civilian populace in that way, rather than trying
to bring it down from the top. It worked better
coming up from the bottom.
And your second? Touring Vietnam from December of
65 to December 66, your Civil Affairs and
Psychological Worker Staff Officer with the
United States 25th Infantry Division. Chu Chi,
RVM, and 3rd Corps Area. Did you, do you feel you did
a better job the second time in Vietnam?
Will? Or were you more cynical? I don't think I was
ever cynical.
I still believed in what I
was doing. What was your job? 25th
Division. U.S. 25th Division.
I don't think that I ever became cynical
concerning the
reasons that we were there. As a matter of fact, I
was probably to use the term gum-poe in this
particular area of civil affairs and psyops at
that time. After having studied everything that I
possibly could concerning the areas of
pacification of the civilian populace, I
believed that it could be done. I was probably
influenced a lot by my studies and the successes
that the British had had in Malaya. And I had
believed that properly utilized, and this is
probably about the time that the term strategic
hamlet came about, that at least when I first
became aware of it, I thought this was going to
operate and I thought it was going to work. And I
believed that it could. What was the purpose of
Strategic Hamlet? The Strategic Hamlet was, as I
remember, you take some of the local people, some
of the boys and men, train them, give them a certain
amount of training, give them a weapon, rifles,
and light machine guns to protect their own Hamlet
from VidCon. The philosophy was that if there was
local folks protecting themselves, that it would
deny the VidCon from the right.